Hello, hello, hello, and welcome
to English Learning for Curious
Minds, by Leonardo English, the show
where you can listen to fascinating
stories and learn weird and wonderful
things about the world at the same
time as improving your English.
I'm Alastair Budge, and today it’s part
three of our three-part mini-series
on “Tyrants Of The Roman Empire”.
In case you missed them, part one was
on Caligula, part two was on Nero,
and we are going to round off the
series by talking about Commodus,
the so-called “Gladiator Emperor”.
You can listen to this episode without
having listened to the previous two,
but it will make more sense if you’ve
listened to those, as I’ll reference a
few names and events from those periods.
So, if you’d prefer to listen to
those first and you haven’t done so
already, now is the time to press pause.
OK then, let’s get started
and talk about Commodus.
Millions of people around the world
today turn to the musings of the
Roman emperor Marcus Aurelius.
Although it’s almost 2,000 years old,
his internal thoughts about “how to
live a good life”, immortalised in
Meditations, have become a sort of
guidebook, a blueprint for how to be
content and satisfied, even today, in
a world that bears little similarity
to the one in which Aurelius lived.
As such, we think of Aurelius as a wise
and thoughtful man, a man who carefully
considered every decision, evaluating
the advantages and disadvantages
before choosing the wisest path.
He was, undoubtedly, one of the better
rulers of Rome and was praised both by
his contemporaries and historians looking
back on his 19-year stint in power.
On a personal level, some decisions
are more debatable, whether that’s
his tolerance of his wife’s frequent
infidelity, his willingness to turn a
blind eye to court scandals, or even his
habit of promoting his favourites over
other, perhaps more talented, people.
There is one decision, though, which
has forever tarnished his legacy.
He named as his successor his son
Commodus, a man who has gone down in
history as a tyrant, an imbecile, a
sadist, a megalomaniac, a madman, and,
to quote the Roman historian Cassius
Dio, “a greater curse to the Romans
than any pestilence or any crime”.
Now, one can certainly argue that
Marcus Aurelius had little choice but
to nominate Commodus as his heir; he
had no other surviving sons, and failing
to name Commodus as his successor would
have put his son’s life in danger.
And Marcus Aurelius was human after all.
Any parent’s first preoccupation is for
the safety of their child, and it’s not
difficult to see how Marcus Aurelius
might have overlooked some early signs
of Commodus’ insuitability for the
top job, if indeed there were signs.
So, perhaps he had no other option,
or at least no other good options, but
the choice to go with Commodus would
forever be a black mark on the otherwise
positive legacy of Marcus Aurelius.
So, to the early life of Commodus.
He was born in AD 161, the first
emperor to be born “in the purple”,
or born during his father’s reign.
As you will remember from the previous
two episodes, most Roman emperors
didn’t have a clear successor;
there was constant jockeying for
power through affairs, marriages,
divorces, adoptions and poisonings,
and parents–often divorced or widowed
mothers–tried to position their sons as
first in line to the title of emperor.
Marcus Aurelius was an exception,
in that he had a relatively
uncomplicated personal life.
He was only married once, and the
marriage bore at least 14 children.
But only one son and four
daughters were still alive at
the time of their father’s death.
The daughters, this being Ancient
Rome, didn’t get a look in; they didn’t
feature in the succession planning.
This left the one and only son: Commodus.
And from a very young age, he had been
groomed for the role of Roman Emperor.
He was officially made Caesar at the age
of 5, together with his younger brother.
Caesar, by the way, means the
designated heir; the son who will
become emperor on his father’s death.
His younger brother, his co-Caesar,
Marcus Annius Verus, died a few years
later, which made Commodus the sole heir.
He travelled around with his father,
following his military campaign
in Germany, and is thought to have
received personal tuition from
the best scholars at the time.
As Marcus Aurelius grew older, and
following a particularly threatening
uprising by one of his governors,
Avidius Cassius, he gave his son
increasing responsibilities, making
it abundantly clear that Commodus
was his handpicked successor.
First came the victory title
of Germanicus, then the title
of Imperator, then consul.
And for a couple of years,
he ruled jointly with his
father, with Marcus Aurelius.
And in March 180 AD, his father died,
leaving the then 18-year-old Commodus the
undisputed and official Roman Emperor.
At first, the transition was smooth.
Commodus inherited an empire that
was stable, wealthy, and at relative
peace, by Roman standards at least.
His father’s long wars on
the Danube frontier were
effectively coming to an end.
The Senate and the army accepted
him without serious opposition.
For many Romans, this looked like
the best possible scenario: a young
emperor, born into legitimacy, stepping
into his father’s shoes without
the messy power struggles that had
accompanied so many of his predecessors.
But the contrast between father
and son soon became obvious.
Marcus Aurelius was austere,
philosophical, and endlessly patient.
Commodus was none of these things.
Ancient writers describe him as lazy,
vain, and obsessed with personal pleasure.
Where his father had spent years in
muddy camps on the German frontier,
fighting for the glory of Rome,
Commodus preferred the comfort of
the palace, the baths, and the arena.
He made peace with the Germanic
tribes almost immediately, abandoning
his father’s planned campaigns.
For Rome’s soldiers and generals,
this felt like throwing away
years of hard-won gains.
For Commodus, it meant he could return
to Rome, parade in triumph, and present
himself as the bringer of peace.
And once back in Rome, his reign
began to take on a different tone.
He delighted in public shows, extravagant
spectacles, and above all, in himself.
Coins were minted showing him as Hercules,
draped in a lion-skin, carrying a club.
Statues were erected
portraying him as a demigod.
He renamed months of the year after
his own titles and would even go so far
as to rename Rome itself the “Colonia
Commodiana”, the Colony of Commodus.
If Marcus Aurelius had been the
model of self-restraint, Commodus
was the model of self-indulgence.
And soon, that indulgence would
extend beyond self-glorification
to something that horrified Rome’s
elite, the emperor’s decision to step
into the gladiatorial arena, not as
a spectator, but as a participant.
As a gladiator.
Now, as you probably know, and as
we touched on in previous episodes,
gladiators were right at the bottom of
the social pecking order in Ancient Rome.
They were often slaves, criminals, or
prisoners of war, trained to fight to
the death for the amusement of the crowd.
They might be admired for their
bravery, and indeed, they could
win their freedom if they were
successful enough in the arena.
But they were disposable.
Their lives were cheap.
They were entertainment, not citizens.
And they certainly weren’t emperors.
So when Commodus began not just
sponsoring games, but also entering
the arena himself, it was scandalous.
He is described as having fought
hundreds of times, with one account
saying that he fought as a gladiator
on more than 1,000 occasions.
Of course, the fights
were carefully staged.
He never faced a serious opponent.
He would, reportedly, start with
birds or animals kept in nets or
cages, so they couldn’t fight back.
It wasn’t a “fight” so
much as an execution.
Then he would move on to more
exotic animals, cheetahs,
lions and even elephants.
Again, this wouldn’t be
a fair fight, man vs.
beast.
Commodus would stand high up in the
gallery with a bow and arrow, and he
would dispatch the animals from the
comfort and safety of his private box.
In a single day, he is reported to
have killed 100 lions, which is, of
course, no reflection on his talents
as a marksman, as an archer, but rather
of his insatiable thirst for blood.
And he is also remembered for
getting into the arena himself, for
a “fight” with human gladiators.
Again, his survival is no reflection
of his skill with a sword, but rather
of the fact that his opponents were
instructed not to fight back and
given blunt and ineffective weapons.
In some cases, they were completely
unarmed, unable to defend themselves,
and Commodus merely played the
role of public executioner.
On one famous occasion, he is reported
to have rounded up all men in Rome
who had lost a foot and had them
tied together to resemble giants, and
he then clubbed them all to death.
And to make matters worse, or
even more bizarre, he demanded
payment for his “victories”.
Cassius Dio writes that he would charge
the city one million sesterces for each
appearance, a vast sum, practically
bankrupting the treasury for what
were essentially vanity performances.
And it wasn’t just the financial cost.
For Rome’s elite, this was humiliation.
Nero had acted in plays, which was
embarrassing, but an emperor as a
gladiator was on another level altogether.
The emperor, who was supposedly
chosen by the gods to rule the
world, now played the part of a
common slave for cheers and applause.
The ordinary people, however, loved it.
They packed the Colosseum to watch their
emperor dressed as Hercules, club in
hand, boasting of his divine strength.
Commodus leaned into this image,
declaring himself not only Hercules
reborn but also the new founder of Rome.
And while Commodus was “busy” in the
arena, lapping up the cheers of the
audience or giggling at the sight
of the bloodthirsty events unfolding
below, the day-to-day business
of running Rome was left in the
hands of favourites and courtiers.
First came a freedman called
Saoterus, who acted as a chamberlain
and enjoyed enormous influence.
He only lasted a couple of years, as
he was murdered in 182 AD by another
freedman named Cleander, who assumed
the roles and responsibilities
previously held by Saoterus.
Cleander effectively ran the
empire for several years, selling
offices, governorships, and even
Senate seats to the highest bidder.
It was government as an open auction,
and it bred resentment and chaos.
In AD 190, when a shortage of grain
caused riots in Rome, the mob turned
on Cleander, demanding his execution.
Commodus, whose primary concern
was self-preservation, had his
former favourite killed, but the
episode left the empire unstable,
and the emperor even more isolated.
And by this point, AD 192, Commodus was a
man completely consumed by his delusions.
He renamed the legions after himself,
declared every day a holiday in
his honour, and insisted that
statues of himself as Hercules
be erected across the empire.
And while the emperor lived in
this god-like fantasy, the city
he ruled was sinking into misery.
The treasury was empty, the Senate
was humiliated, and the people
of Rome, who might have once been
entertained by his games, now only
saw corruption and instability.
And the final straw came with what he
planned to do on New Year of AD 193.
Now, New Year was an important
day in the Roman calendar.
It was when magistrates took office,
sacrifices were made, and the emperor
made public appearances to mark
Rome’s continuation and stability.
Commodus had an unusual idea.
According to Cassius Dio, he
announced that in the New Year’s
festivities he would appear not as
the emperor, but as a gladiator.
For Rome’s ruling class,
this was too much.
The Senate might flatter an emperor,
tolerate excess, even turn a blind
eye to corruption, but the idea of
the emperor reducing himself to a
professional gladiator on this highly
symbolic day, and dragging the empire
down with him, was intolerable.
And as with Caligula and Nero
before him, plots began to form.
There had, in fact, been multiple
attempts to kill him, and it is in many
respects surprising that he managed to
hold onto power for as long as he did.
Indeed, in AD 182, just a couple of
years into his reign, he narrowly
escaped an assassination attempt
led not by senators or generals,
but by his own sister, Lucilla.
Lucilla was the widow of the
former co-emperor Lucius Verus,
and she had expected to play a
significant role in Roman politics.
She was older than Commodus
and, according to Cassius Dio,
she resented being sidelined.
So, together with a group of senators,
she hatched a plan to have him killed.
It was a simple enough plan.
Wait until he was coming
into a theatre, and stab him.
It should have worked, but it went
disastrously, almost comically, wrong.
One of the conspirators confronted
Commodus in public with a dagger, but
he couldn’t resist the urge to indulge
in some Hollywood-style theatrics.
So instead of stabbing him immediately, he
declared “The Senate sends you this!”, and
before he could plunge the dagger into the
emperor, he was seized Commodus’ guards,
and the whole conspiracy was unravelled.
Lucilla was banished to Capri
and later executed, while many
of her allies were put to death.
This was the most famous of the
failed assassination attempts.
The successful one came ten years
later, on New Year’s Eve, AD 192.
It’s not clear exactly what precipitated
the plot, but it’s believed that it
was in reaction to Commodus’ plan
to arrest and execute three of his
closest allies: his new chamberlain,
Eclectus, the head of the Praetorian
Guard, Laetus, and his mistress, Marcia.
When Marcia got wind of this plan,
and presumably realising “it’s either
me or him”, she sent for the other
two names on the “hit list”, and the
three conspired to murder Commodus.
There were frantic attempts
to poison him during the day,
but none of them succeeded.
Eventually, they called upon a wrestler
called Narcissus, who was actually
one of Commodus’s wrestling partners.
He was sent into Commodus’ chamber
with instructions to kill him.
He entered the emperor’s chamber
and found him in the bath, where
he proceeded to strangle him.
Commodus might have been Rome’s most
decorated and highly-paid gladiator, but
there, naked in the bath, he was no match
for a man armed only with his bare hands.
The emperor, now ex-emperor,
was thirty-one years old.
And with his death, the dynasty
of the philosopher-emperor Marcus
Aurelius ended in blood and disgrace.
There were calls for Commodus’ body
to be dragged through the streets
of Rome on hooks before being dumped
into the Tiber, and it almost would
have been, had it not been for the
intervention of a consul called Pertinax,
a man who would in fact go on to be
Emperor, albeit only for 87 days.
Although his body wasn’t dragged
through the streets, the Senate wasted
no time in condemning his memory.
They declared a damnatio memoriae,
erasing his name from inscriptions,
tearing down his statues, and
branding him a public enemy.
To them, he was not just a
bad emperor, but a tyrant who
had nearly destroyed Rome.
In the words of Cassius Dio, Commodus’
rule marked the descent "from a kingdom
of gold to one of iron and rust".
And Rome itself was left in chaos.
Commodus’s death did not bring
stability; instead, it plunged the
empire into what historians have
called the Year of the Five Emperors,
a rapid succession of rulers backed
by rival generals and factions.
The imperial throne, which was handed
on a silver plate to Commodus, became
the most dangerous seat in the world.
Now, as with the two other subjects
of this mini-series, it’s important
to remember that everything we know
about them was written by men with
an agenda, and was often written
many years after their death.
Cassius Dio, in particular,
clearly loathed him.
Yes, it seems very likely that Commodus
was a pretty awful individual and
a terrible emperor, but it was very
convenient for him to be painted as such.
And this is the thread that runs
through all three of the tyrants
we’ve covered in this series.
Caligula, Nero, Commodus.
Each of them is remembered as a
monster, a caricature of cruelty and
excess, albeit in different ways.
Each of them was accused of
madness, of megalomania, of treating
Rome as their personal stage.
And yet, in every case, the sources
we rely on were written by senators,
historians, or chroniclers who hated
them, and who often had very good
reasons to exaggerate their faults.
So perhaps the question is not just
“were they really this bad?” but
“why were they remembered this way?”
Part of it was certainly deserved; all
three were tyrants in different ways.
But part of it was also politics: it
served the interests of their successors,
and of Rome’s elite, to present them
as villains so that later emperors
might seem like saviours by comparison.
In that sense, their reputations tell
us as much about the anxieties and
priorities of Roman society as they
do about the emperors themselves.
What was intolerable was not only cruelty
or extravagance, which were both not
uncommon in Rome, but the violation
of expectations: emperors acting like
gladiators, emperors singing on stage,
and emperors humiliating the Senate.
These were lines Rome’s ruling
class could not accept, and so
the rulers who crossed them became
immortalised as bywords for tyranny.
OK, then, that is it for today's episode
on Commodus, and with that comes the
end of this three-part mini-series
on “Tyrants Of The Roman Empire”.
I hope you enjoyed the mini-series
and that it shone some light on these
characters that you no doubt had heard
of, but perhaps were not acquainted
with every aspect of their life.
To state the obvious, each of these
episodes could have been ten times longer,
and choosing what to include and what
not to include was a task in itself.
But we will probably return to
some of the topics and stories in
future episodes, like the story of
the luckless eunuch, Sporus, so you
have that to look forward to at some
stage in the not-too-distant future.
You've been listening to English Learning
for Curious Minds by Leonardo English.
I'm Alastair Budge, you stay safe, and
I'll catch you in the next episode.